
## Contents :-

#### [[#Types of Muscles]]
#### [[#Muscle Fiber Types]]
#### [[#Types of Muscle Contraction]]
#### [[#Metabolism and Bioenergetics]]
#### [[#Cardiovascular System]]

---

## Types of Muscles

1. **Smooth muscles** - involuntary muscles controlled by the autonomic nervous system. Located in blood vessels and internal organs.
2. **Cardiac muscle** - located in the heart and controlled by autonomic nervous and endocrine systems.
3. **Skeletal muscles** - voluntary muscles controlled consciously by the somatic nervous system.

### Sarcomere

- It is the smallest functional unit of a muscle.

---

## Muscle Fiber Types 

- Muscle fibers are activated based on force demanded.

1. **Type I**
	- slow-twitch fibers
	- high aerobic endurance (oxidative)
	- suited for low/moderate intensity activities 
	- carbs and fat used as fuel
	- slower contractile speed 
	- fatigue resistant
	
2. **Type II**
	- fast-twitch fibers 
	- *TypeIIa* **FOG** (***Fast Oxidative Glycolytic***)
	- *TypeIIx* **FG** (***Fast Glycolytic***)
	- fatigues easily
	- poor use of oxygen

---

## Types of Muscle Contraction

1. **Isometric** - force is generated but length of muscle is unchanged
2. **Concentric** - force is developed while muscle is shortening
3. **Eccentric** - force is developed while muscle is lengthening

---

## Metabolism and Bioenergetics

- **Metabolism** - total of all chemical reactions that occur in the body
	- **Anabolic reactions** - synthesis of molecules
	- **Catabolic reactions** - breakdown of molecules	
- **Bioenergetics** - converting nutrients into energy
- **ATP** (***Adenosine Triphosphate***) is the energy currency of our cells.
- Energy from food sources is stored as ATP in cells.
- It is the source of all energy used during exercise and rest.

### Carbohydrate Catabolism

- **Glycolysis** - breakdown of glucose. End product is either *lactic acid* (anaerobic) or *pyruvic acid* (aerobic).
- **Glycogenolysis** - process by which glycogen is broken into glucose to be used by muscles.

- Short duration events use creatine phosphate as energy source. As duration increases, energy source switched to glycogenic system and finally oxidative system.

---

## Cardiovascular System

1. **Heart** - creates pressure to pump blood
2. **Vessels** - arteries and arterioles, capillaries, veins
3. **Blood**

### Circulation of Blood through Heart

Right Atrium -> Right Ventricle -> Pulmonary Artery -> Lungs -> Left Atrium -> Left Ventricle -> Aorta -> Rest of body

### Cardio Terms

- **Stroke Volume**: amount of blood ejected from heart per contraction
- **Cardiac Output** = Heart Rate (beats/min) * Stroke Volume (ml/beat)
- **Hematocrit**: percentage of RBCs in total blood volume
- ** Blood Pressure**: blood flow due to pressure generated by the heart
	1. Systolic (<120mmHg) - increases in proportion to exercise intensity
	2. Diastolic (>80mmHg) - should stay the same during exercise
	3. Hypertension
- **VO2Max**: maximum oxygen consumption by our body during an all out aerobic effort. Higher = better.

---
